Another way we can think about the relationship
between these two frames, frame A and frame B,
is that they are related by a single rotation
about some arbitrary axis in space. So, the
challenge becomes to determine what is
this axis of rotation, the vector we going
to define is v and what is the amount of rotation
around that vector, which we’re going to
call Theta. So the problem is to discover
what is v, and what is Theta, that allows
us to rotate frame A into frame B.
In order to find the axis around which we
rotate there is a key observation, and that
is that the axis around which we are going
to rotate must be unchanged by the rotation.
Any point that lies on the rotation axis will
be unchanged by rotation. That implies that
the rotation axis must be an eigenvector of
the matrix R. A rotation matrix has got three
eigenvectors. There is one eigenvector which
is guaranteed to have elements that are real
numbers and it corresponds to the eigenvalue
of 1. There are two complex eigenvectors and
they correspond to complex eigenvalues which
are functions of the rotation angle Theta.
To illustrate this, I am going to create a
rotation matrix. It doesn't particularly matter
what the value is. I am going to create it
using Euler angles. 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. And there
it is. And I can see what that orientation
looks like by plotting it. There we see rotated
coordinate frame corresponding to this rotation
matrix.
Now, I am going to look at the eigenvalues
of this rotation matrix. We see that there
are 3 eigenvalues, we'd expect that since it's a
3x3 matrix and the last eigenvalue is equal
to one. I can look at the eigenvectors as
well by asking for two output arguments from
the eig function. And now we see in the matrix
v, each column of matrix v is an eigenvector
and we're interested in the third eigenvector
because the third eigenvalue was equal to
one, and we can say that this third eigenvector
is real. The imaginary part of all the elements
are equal to zero.
In order to find the amount of rotation as
well as the axis of rotation, we would use
the Toolbox function tr2angvec and pass in
the rotation matrix we're interested in, and
it tells it that we need a rotation of 0.44
radians around this particular vector. Now,
I can get it to put those into variables by
providing two output arguments; tr2angvec,
and the outward variable Theta has been set
to 0.4466 and the output variable v has being
set to the vector around which that rotation
would occur.
So the problem comes down to finding the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of the matrix R. The eigenvector
corresponding to the eigenvalue of one is
a rotation axis V and from the complex eigenvectors,
which are a function of Theta, we can determine
the rotation angle that we require.
Now, let's consider we want to do the inverse;
that we have the rotation angle Theta and
we have the vector about which we rotate called
v, and we want to find the rotation matrix.
And the equation we need is the so-called
Rodriguez Equation and it relates R to v and Theta.
The inverse operation is performed by the
function angvec2r, converts an angle and vector
representation to a rotation matrix. I pass
in the rotation amount and I pass in the vector
and here is the rotation matrix, and it's
exactly the same as the rotation matrix that
I started with.
You’ll notice that the matrix in here is
a skew symmetric matrix and this is the type
of matrix that we've encountered already,
and we will encounter a few other times in
this course of lectures.